Disappointment Project Annotation Guide

Version 1.1, March 13, Nigel G. Ward


=== Purpose ===

We would like a method to automatically detect disappointment in
dialog, at the frame level.  If we can do this, we can write a paper.
Our first practical application will be to combine this with simple
hand-crafted aggregation methods, such as counting the fraction of
frames that seem disappointed, to solve our sponsor's problem.

We want training data, to overcome the problem of having only
dialog-level labels that are insufficient for supervised learning.  In
particular, we want to identify informative regions, likely to be
usefully informative and worth training on.  Exhaustively labeling
everything, or striving to accurate categorizing borderline cases, is
of no interest to us.

We also want data to use for testing purposes.  Ideally this should be
labeled consistently with the training data, but for evaluation
purposes slight differences shouldn't much matter.

Our current modeling strategies all assume that there are basically
two kinds of utterances, disappointed ones, which will be rare in
sucessful dialogs, and neutral ones, which will dominate in the
sucessful dialogs, but also be common in doomed dialogs, especially up
until the point where the merchant presents the first unreasonable
offer.

Some dialogs also appear to include strong markers: super-disappointed
utterances, even one of which is a sure indicator of a doomed dialog,
and super-pleased utterances, even one of which is a sure indicator of
a successful dialog.  Other dialogs contain neither of these, so
modeling strategies based on these super-indicators will likely have
high accuracy but low coverage, unless used in combination.


=== Definition ===

For current purposes, the word "disappointment" broadly means any
indication of a dialog in trouble, that seems locally likely to lead
to a bad outcome.  This may include feelings, stances, and activities
like annoyance, indignation, anger, pleading, remonstrance,
frustration, dismay, sadness, being upset, disengagement,
exasperation, general negative sentiment, and so on.

We are more interested in the more informative disappointments, namely
those that show the merchant-side actor is coming to realize that they
are unlikely to be able to achieve their goal.  Minor disappointments
--- for example, relating to little misunderstandings, or being asked
to repeat something, or being offered something undesired --- should
generally also be marked as disappointment, but this is less critical.

Utterances where the customer-side actor is taking a recovery
strategy, such as taking a negotiating stance, need not be labeled
disappointment, unless you feel that their voice indicates that they
are giving up hope of a successful outcome or abandoning the normal
strategy of an easy, polite conversation.

Disapointment comes in degrees, but for now we are not interested in
the subtleties.  If they sound clearly disappointed, even if not
strongly, it should be marked.  If there is a slight nuance of
disappointment in their voice, there is no need to mark it.

You can base your decisions on the tone of voice, the words they use,
the timing of what they say, and on the broader context, including
what the merchant-side actor just said, and the way the merchant-side
actor reacts to their utterance.

It is normal for different annotators to have different thresholds and
criteria.  High agreeement is not needed or expected.  We may attempt
to predict the number of annotators who label a segment d or dd, so
variety can be welcome.  Incidentally, agreement may here be measured
by a varient of Kappa ((achieved agreement - random agreement) /
(perfect agreement - random agreement)), computed over all frames that
at least one annotator considers to be n, nn, d or dd.


=== Categories ===

d:  disappointed.  

n:  neutral/normal.  Not disappointed. 

?: not clear.  Feel free to use this generously.  There is no need to
agonize over your decisions. In particular, for unintelligible or very
short utterances, this label is appropriate.  Again, as our main
purposes is identifying informative regions, other regions can simply
have this label.

dd: strongly disappointed.  Use this for super-disappointed utterances.

nn: strongly nondisappointed.  Use this for very pleased utterances,
for example when the customer gratefully accepts an offer, or shows
pleasure, or warmth.  Phrases where this might be likely include
"Great", "Thank you so much", and "have a great day!"

o: out of character.  Use this when the caller breaks out of customer
role to ask something about the completion code, or otherwise do
something they wouldn't need to do in an actual call.


=== Units ===

Labels should be generally be done by turns.  These may be as short as
a single word, or as long as several sentences.  It should be fine if
the units are roughly selected, including some silence, as our
processes will (soon) be able to take care of, or ignore, those units.
In particular, turn-internal pauses are not something to worry about.
Modest errors in identifying the start and end of the speech regions
are also tolerable.  Starts should be identified a little more
carefully, since the duration of the lag from a merchant-side offer to
a customer-side response can be informative. 

If the speaker's tone shifts during a turn, or even during an
utterance, split that into two regions and label each separately. 

Regions of silence, music, small uninformative sounds, and so on
should not be labeled.


=== File Naming and File Format ===

Do the annotation in Elan, and "export as" a "tab-delimited text",
taking the defaults.  Give the file the same name as the .wav file,
with the extention .txt.  (The easy way to do do this is to first
"save" the annotations as an .eaf extension file.  The basename you
enter there will be automatically used for the name of the .txt file.)
